Some words that an RSE has a special obligation for making results explainable. (#279)
the-teachingRSE-project/competencies: competencies.md

+ to treat colleagues and collaborators with respect and work towards a fair and inclusive environment, and
+ to promote these values whenever possible and make sure that they are passed on to new practitioners.

The availability of computers has put a tremendously powerful tool at the disposal of the scientific community,

> making scientific simulation even a fourth pillar of science,

Reviewer: third pillar of science. 4th pillar is according to google data science. Maybe change this to

making computational simulation a third pillar of science [some reference].

Reviewer: for the reference I found this: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-76194-3_1#:~:text=Theory%20and%20experiment%20are%20the,(or%20legs)%20of%20science.

which looks like quite an interesting book.

Reviewer: Maybe split this sentence and put: 

Some even say that computational simulations form a third pillar of science.

We could then even expand it and say

and data science a forth.

I must admit I have some sympathy with the thoughts in https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/1810891.1810892

Reviewer 2: This is somewhat mirroring what I learned in numerics about actual simulation being the newest type of experimentation, i.e. `in silico` in addition to `in vivo` and `in vitro`.

> With the possibility of performing a sheer unlimited number of simulations the importance of validation

Reviewer: _sheer unlimited_ is not quite the right expression, maybe _virtually unlimited_ or just _huge_

> becomes far more important in order to stimulate sound decision-making.

Reviewer: maybe add _verification_ and use _enable_ instead of _stimulate_

> becomes far more important in order to stimulate sound decision-making.

Author: Other notes: think about the validation with the computer itself.
check with reality.

> becomes far more important in order to stimulate sound decision-making.

Reviewer 3: Replace "many simulations" by notion of complexity, large parameter-space, .....
Replace "validation" by notion of grasp of epistemological power and conditinalities ....

The RSE learns how to operate and manipulate computers and hence has a special obligation

> to critically evaluate their use and their outputs:

Reviewer: I would drop _and their outputs_, otherwise you probably also need to include the _inputs_

> Is the model fit for purpose? Are the results consistent with theory or observations?

Reviewer: theory and/or observations

Author: ```suggestion
Is the model fit for purpose? Are the results consistent with theory and/or observations?
```

Can the amount of trust I put into a result be reasonably explained?

> For these reasons, caution, a culture of critical thinking, and care of "putting human judgement in the loop" (in practical means, increasing the opportunities for making results explainable) can mitigate problems.

Reviewer: Maybe

For these reasons, the RSE needs to apply caution, a culture of critical thinking, and care of "putting human judgement in the loop" (this means in practice, increasing the opportunities for making results explainable).

Author: Notes for Flo: complexity, AI systems.

Author: other note: is this reflected in teaching.

+ to promote these values whenever possible and make sure that they are passed on to new practitioners.

The availability of computers has put a tremendously powerful tool at the disposal of the scientific community.
Computer simulations are now considered to be the third pillar of science, while data science is on its way to becoming a fourth pillar [@Weinzierl2021].
With the possibility of performing a virtually unlimited number of simulations, computers enable the study of systems of unprecedented complexity.
Therefore validation becomes far more important in order to enable sound decision-making that is grounded in independent observations of reality.
The RSE needs to be aware of the limits of the epistemological capabilities of a simulation 
and has the obligation to critically evaluate a computer's use:
Is the model fit for purpose? Are the results consistent with theory and/or observations?
Can the amount of trust put into a result be reasonably explained?
These issues are particularly relevant to the scientific application of AI systems.
For these reasons the RSE needs to apply caution, a culture of critical thinking, and care of "putting human judgement in the loop".

> In practice this means increasing the opportunities for making results explainable.

Reviewer: I think this is a good start. It deals with the philosophical aspects which I think is really useful (and will keep me busy). I think that this only covers part of what RSEs do, develop simulations. I think another part of what they do (not necessarily the same people) is handling data. There we have issues such as biases and data protection. I am missing the ethical aspects. I guess that's kind of handled in the next paragraph. Maybe that should be updated as well so that they read well together.

Given this is a total rewrite I wonder if it would be better if you created an alternative branch/PR that we can discuss.

+ to treat colleagues and collaborators with respect and work towards a fair and inclusive environment, and
+ to promote these values whenever possible and make sure that they are passed on to new practitioners.

> The availability of computers has put a tremendously powerful tool at the disposal of the scientific community,
> making simulation already the third pillar of science while data science is on its way to becoming a fourth pillar [@Weinzierl2021].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The availability of computers has put a tremendously powerful tool at the disposal of the scientific community.
Computer simulations are now considered to be the third pillar of science, while data science is on its way to becoming a fourth pillar [@Weinzierl2021].
```

With the possibility of performing a virtually unlimited number of simulations, computers enable the study of systems of unprecedented complexity.

> Therefore validation becomes far more important in order to enable a sound decision-making that is grounded in independent observations of reality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore validation becomes far more important in order to enable sound decision-making that is grounded in independent observations of reality.
```

> Therefore validation becomes far more important in order to enable a sound decision-making that is grounded in independent observations from reality,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore validation becomes far more important in order to enable a sound decision-making that is grounded in independent observations of reality.
```

> and is aware of the limits of its epistemological capabilities.

Reviewer: this sentence is dangling.

> and is aware of the limits of its epistemological capabilities.
> The RSE learns how to operate and manipulate computers and at the same time has been brought up on the value that an RSE
> has the obligation to critically evaluate a computer's use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RSE needs to be aware of the limits of the epistemological capabilities of a simulation 
and has the obligation to critically evaluate a computer's use:
```

> has a special obligation to critically evaluate a computer's use:

Reviewer: is it really special? maybe just
```suggestion
has the obligation to critically evaluate a computer's use:
```

Is the model fit for purpose? Are the results consistent with theory and/or observations?

> Can the amount of trust I put into a result be reasonably explained?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Can the amount of trust put into a result be reasonably explained?
```

> Scientific applications of AI systems are currently faced with exactly these issues.

Reviewer: maybe put the other way round
```suggestion
These issues are particularly relevant to the scientific application of AI systems.
```

> For these reasons the RSE needs to apply caution, a culture of critical thinking, and care of "putting human judgement in the loop"
> (this means in practice, increasing the opportunities for making results explainable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these reasons the RSE needs to apply caution, a culture of critical thinking, and care of "putting human judgement in the loop".
In practice this means increasing the opportunities for making results explainable.
```
